Israel's offensive in Rafa has put
relations with its neighbor Egypt under
severe strain Egypt has for decades
co-operated on security Arrangements
along its border with Gaza but Cairo
suspended that cooperation when Israeli
troops took over the gazan side of the
Rafa border crossing the move could have
far-reaching implications for both
countries and for the people of
Gaza Israeli soldiers in Rafa the
biggest Crossing for Aid coming into
aaza now shut off Israel has opened
other Crossings further north but this
one has special
significance the other side of the Rafa
Crossing is Egypt the country shares a
206 km long border with Israel but it's
the 12 km where Egypt borders Gaza that
are now in dispute for decades Israel
has relied on Egypt to help Implement
security Arrangements in Gaza as well as
for delivery of food and other
necessities
that cooperation all dates back to the
Camp David Accords which came after
years of conflict including three
Wars signing the Accords was a major
strategic step changing the Dynamics in
the region Egypt's substantial military
was no longer a threat it also resulted
in a shift in US policy Egypt became a
major recipient of American foreign
aid but Israel's cooperation with with
its closest partner in the Middle East
is over for now Egypt says the IDF
takeover of the Gaza side of the Raa
Crossing violates treaties that say the
Zone should be
demilitarized in addition Egypt has now
announced it will join South Africa's
case against Israel for genocide at the
international court of justice adding to
Israel's International isolation Us
Media have also reported that Egypt May
downgrade its diplomatic ties with
Israel however Egypt cannot afford to
alienate the US it's also worried about
a possible Palestinian Exodus into Egypt
itself so there are reasons to resume
cooperation with Israel at some point in
the
future tww Middle East analyst J Shani
rosanis can tell us more welcome shanie
so we have relations now uh between
Israel and Egypt at their tensest since
the Camp David Accords were signed and
despite this Israel determined to
continue its operation into into into
Rafa explain to us why why is Rafa so
important to them well for Israel Rafa
is basically the last strong hold of
Kamas they for Nan he has built the last
months Rafa is the only thing stopping
Israel from the Victory and the total
elimination of Hamas so he needs to do
that for his political standing but also
technically the The Crossing in Rafa has
been hamas's main getaway uh point you
know that was the place where they got
most of their supply from through Egypt
it's also what caused a lot of tensions
once October 7th uh you know the
catastrophe has has unveiled itself and
Israel slowly realized how much uh arms
Hamas has been holding through you know
been Gathering through the RAF Crossing
um and starting to be a bit more before
that Israel was more trusting of the
Egyptian handling of that border and
suspicion has buil up since so Rafa um
is is just the point where everything
boils down to it's now the main crossing
point for aid but also has been uh for
many years the crossing point from other
Goods that not necessarily what Israel
wanted to be see to see going into the
Gaza Strip okay so Israel goes into Rafa
despite uh the United States the United
Nations the the UK and so many of its
allies saying don't do this what happens
after Rafa well that's the
million-dollar question it's always
there you know we've been having this
question in our minds you know when it
comes to Gaza and what happens you know
what Israel's plan for the day after
in so many aspects and we've see we're
seeing very little answers um
technically about dealing with the
crossing and and the the transfer of
goods between J uh Gaza and Egypt Israel
is planning to have some other neutral
forces not the Palestinian Authority uh
which was actually we know refus to do
that as long as Israel is in control of
Gaza um but rather a private company who
deals with that but there also there's a
lot of legal um elements connected to
that if that if that company is is is a
foreign nationality does what does it do
when you know there's there's something
happening at the border is Israel
shooting at British or American or
whoever you know will be maintaining
that what would that mean so Israel
doesn't really have a very good concrete
plan for the day after and this is
partially why we we're seeing this
pressure for the Americans they're
saying we don't see where this is
heading we we don't see what's the end
game and and we're trying to you know
Steer Israel away from that but so far
with no not much luck okay so talk to us
change of Direction talk to us about Aid
flows into Gaza at the moment well it
it's you know it's always been a topic
and you know blocking the RAF Crossing
which is the Egyptians have decided
basically they do not want to cooperate
with Israel once Israel took over the um
Palestinian side of the Border because
of the symbolism of Israel taking uh
over this part of land and sort of
taking over Gaza and the fear that they
might seem complicit with Israel taking
over that part um but also we know that
the economy the the money that is um the
that Crossing has been generating for
Gaza was was quite big especially
knowing that um the suat canal trade has
been cut off because of the houthi uh
threat and so on Egypt has taken a very
big uh toll to its income in the last
months and sort of trying to kind of uh
make Rafa kind of help to to to do that
um the problem now is that as long as as
there is no uh Crossing from Egypt a lot
of the goods that have been sent to Gaza
were going to Elish to the Egyptian uh
Port ports and now they have no way into
Gaza and this is part of the leverage
that Egypt is trying to use against
Israel journalist Kareem El guari has
been following this story for us he
joins us now from Cairo Kareem both
Israel and Egypt blame each other for
blocking aid from entering into Gaza
what's actually preventing that aid from
entering through the Rafa
Crossing well first and foremost on the
other side is an active combat zone
right now with the Israeli Army on the
ground fighting um nobody of his same
mind will drive a truck into this area
right now uh the second reason is of
course the both of them remained closed
and there is right now as you mentioned
in the report the Egyptians stopped the
security cooperation with the Israeli
Army in the immediate border area and
that's another reason while there is no
coordination for this Aid coming back
into the Gaza Strip which is of course
important for the entire Southern Garden
strip the border that opened by Israel
is in the north so far away from this
area which is a big problem for them in
the Rafa and also in the central Gaza
area now Israel has seized control of
the Gaza side of the Rafa Crossing
kareim why is that such an issue for
Egypt well Egypt war Israel since weeks
not to do an incursion into Rafa they
pleaded to the Americans to make sure
that this is not happening now that is
happening Egypt is reacting to this
stopping the security
cooporation uh and also wanting to join
the case of South Africa uh in the
international court court of justice in
the where Israel is accused of
committing genocide and there's now talk
about
downgrading uh the relations there's
maybe talk about D drawing the Egyptian
ambassador
from Israel um the Egyptians are also
mainly arguing that this uh incursion
into the into the into Rafa and the
Takeover of the border crossing violates
existing contracts between both sides
existing treaties between both sides
where it stated that this area should be
a demilitarized area where there is no
heavy weapons um allowed so that's the
official reason why Egypt is so angry
and this reacting so uh decisively to
this new incursion and to the Takeover
of the water post of Fara more on this
from DW special correspondent a Ibrahim
in Jerusalem welcome Aya let's start
with Israel's offensive in Gaza how deep
into Rafa is the
IDF so we're hearing from I witnesses
that uh the Israelis are uh going deeper
into that southernmost uh part of the
strip Rafa now approaching the Eastern
side of uh Rafa and we're told about uh
450,000 so almost half a million people
are on the Move uh to try and Escape uh
uh this um this incursion into rafah if
you will but of course there are many
difficulties there uh we're talking
about uh people trying to move uh
probably not for the first time since
the War uh began after 7 months uh of
constant bombardment they may not have
the equipment they may not have the
means to get to a safe place and at the
same time uh the IDF has said last night
that it is attacking Gaza from the uh
South north and uh Center so for many of
these civilians uh trying to escape it's
it's it's difficult uh to know where to
go even with the um the the the
so-called safe Zone uh that is Israel
has has outlined for them well meanwhile
the US and the United Nations have been
pressing uh Israel to reopen the Rafa
border crossing for Aid deliveries why
has there been so little progress
there um that is unclear although
yesterday we heard a statement by the
Israeli foreign uh Minister saying that
uh the opening of the RAF Crossing uh
Now lies in the hands of uh of Egypt and
this uh state has uh caused sort of a a
spat now between Egypt and Israel Egypt
of course being the country with the
oldest peace treaty with Israel among
its Arab uh uh neighbors uh with the
Egyptians saying that well it's the
Israelis who have now um you know
occupied if you will the Palestinian
side of the crossing which some experts
have said is actually in violation of
the peace treaty between Egypt and
Israel so there seems to be a bit of
confusion and perhaps even a of
deflection on Israel's responsibility
there with that statement but unclear
why that opening is not open yet
certainly something that uh many in the
International Community would like to
see as hunger and and Desperation are
are spread inside the Gaza Strip okay
thank you for that a DW special
correspondent Aya Ibrahim in Jerusalem